range
@article{savory1983savory}

holistic grazing or savory grazing method consider
succession,water,mineral,energy and
range rest,fire, grazing, physical impact of animals, wildlife, man
with managment guidelines of time, density, herd, weakest link cause an effect, ecosystem, flexibility, burning, economics
grazing time must be linked to plant growth rate, time until animal return, availibility of forage

@article{kahan2006impact}

impact of soil/veg params in sahel SEBEX
It was found that proper parameter estimation of leaf area index, stomatal resistance,
and hydraulic conductivity allow enough evaporation to occur in land surface simulations
Observational data sets from the Sahelian Energy Balance Experiment (SEBEX) and the Hydrological Atmospheric Pilot
Experiment (HAPEX-Sahel)
Land cover change can affect the climate by altering the partitioning of
available energy between sensible and latent heat and by changing the partitioning of precipitation
between evapotranspiration and runoff
According to Wallace et al.
(1991), data describing Sahelian vegetation was very
sparse. Therefore, information about the energy and
water balances in the Sahel was urgently needed.
SEBEX was conducted with the goal of attaining
direct measurements of surface energy fluxes from
varying Sahelian land types. HAPEX-Sahel was
conducted in Niger, West Africa, in 1991–1993 with
the purpose of improving parameterizations of land
surface atmosphere interaction on the scale of a GCM
grid box.
78% of the vegetation was
comprised of leguminous and grass species (Cassia
mimosoides, Tephrosia linearis, Aristida mutabills,
and Eragrsostis tremula). The remainder was woody
shrubs about 2.5 m in height (Guiera senegalensis and
Combretum glutinosum) with a few occasional trees
(1.5 per hectare) of 5–10 m in height. The soil tends to
be very sandy and about 0.5 m deep.
The experiments described utilize the Simplified
Simple Biosphere Model (SSiB) (Xue et al., 1991)
Because HAPEX observations were taken inten-
sively for 8 weeks, producing a complete set of flux
measurements for the whole study period, the HAPEX
set was used for model parameter calibration (Section 6).
The SEBEX set contains 2 years of forcing data and
was used for validation (Section 6) and sensitivity
testing (Section 5) to guide/evaluate the calibration
process. The control run for HAPEX (referred to as
H-1) employed parameters for standard type-8
vegetation (Table 2), shrubs with ground-cover
(Dorman and Sellers, 1989), which is normally used
in GCMs for the Sahel area.
Although changing
albedo had a major impact in the sensitivity tests, it
was not desirable to alter this parameter in the
calibration since the type-8 vegetation already
represented an albedo similar to that observed at the
HAPEX site. The primary parameters discussed in
this section and adjusted in the final calibration are as
follows: leaf area index (LAI), stomatal resistance,
soil hydraulic conductivity at saturation, and soil
thermal diffusivity.

Runoff/LH most affected by LAI and stomatal resistance and soil hydraulic cond

In uncalibrated runs LH severely underestimated

The increase in LAI and
reduction in stomatal resistance allowed for more
transport of moisture from the land surface to the
atmosphere. This change in latent heat flux also served
to reduce sensible heat flux, bringing them both much
closer to observations, with significantly reduced RMS
errors. On a diurnal scale, the greatest difference
between the control and experimental runs exists
during the day; on a monthly scale, there appears to be
the greatest difference during the wet months.

@article{kennedy2008effect}

effect of hernage on milk production

Offering a low DHA restricted grass dry matter intake (DMI) during R1 and R2 yet concentrate supplementation significantly increased total
DMI (2.3 (R1) and 3.0 (R2) kg DM/cow). Animals offered a low DHA had a significantly lower bodyweight (BW) than those offered a
medium or high DHA during P1 and P2. Concentrate supplementation increased BW during P1 and P2 (+9 and +14 kg/cow, respectively).
There was no effect of treatment on BW during P3. There was no effect of DHA on EB in R1; during R2 animals offered a low DHA had the
lowest EB. Concentrate significantly increased EB in R1 and R2 and increased plasma glucose concentration while it decreased plasma
NEFA and BHB concentrations. The results of this study indicate that animals should be offered a low DHA up to 80 DIM after which DHA
should be increased however animals should also be supplemented with concentrate during the early post-partum period.


@article{harper1999direct}

direct measurement of feedlot CH4 vs grazing - more from grazing vs highly digestible feed.
soluble N can be comparable between different pasture types and feed
ch4 estimates vary depennding on methodology.

@article{dragan2003application}

spatial decision support system SDSS Thiopia reduce soil erosion by reallocating crops to protect soil

based on land-cover/land use, altitude, potential erosion, roads, water, protection from portential crops

A reduction of soil loss from 4.5 t/ha/year to below 1 t/ha/yr

biggest impediment shortage of cultivable land

@article{coughenour1991spatial}

traditional pastoralism would promot sustainability - models that integrate plant growth ungulate movement and foraging are suggested as a way to improve analysis

unmanaged vs grazing systems: no or little effect? 

pastoral systems under studied
communal grazing 
opportunistic movement

in Niger delta moved toto N drylands in wet season to exploit transient pulse in plant growth. overgrazing prevented by movement due to scarce water. in dry season, return to Niger delta. poor forage, wet soil, tsetse, in wet season.

tragedy of the commons? not true open acccess

traditional pastoralism come into conflict with other land use - settled agriculture --> overgrazing
widespread pattern of overgrazing near water

grasses not rested in settled agriculture

ungulates confined by humans disrupt natural forage rest

large and small scale grazing patterns important - at small scales, detrimenal impacts on plants due to grazing

grazed plants compensate due to increased nutrient recycling by animals

patch grazing initiated when supply>demand - regrowth on grazed patches higher quality

dense herds exert uniform non selective grazing pressure

knowledge of plant responses to various defoliation predict response to herbivore movement

disruptions occur when movement is slower than landscape change

@misc{wwf}

features of sahel
acacia savannah from N Senegal to Sudan 
flat hot strongly seasonal 600mm S, N200mm
rodents and birds, native unguates( orryx, antelope extinct)
The wooded grassland is the most widespread vegetation type on
sandy soils in the southern Sahel, where annual rainfall ranges from 250 mm to 500 mm per year. Typical woody species
include Acacia tortilis, which is most common, as well as A. laeta, Commiphora africana, Balanites aegyptiaca and Boscia
senegalensis. Grass cover is continuous, with annual species such as Cenchrus biflorus, Schoenefeldia gracilis, and
Aristida stipoides well­represented. In the northern Sahel, grasslands grow on deep, sandy soils, with some woody species.
Typical species include Acacia spp., and Boscia senegalensis. Perennial desert species, such as Panicum turgidum and
Aristida sieberana, alternate with typical Sahelian grassland (MH/E, WWF and IUCN 1996).
@article{darkoh1998nature}

@article{reeder2002influence}

effect of livestock grazing on C content of plant-soil system in two semi-arid grasslands praire and steppe. treatments include season long grazing different stocking rates, and nongrazed. 

Higher soil C in grazed pastures higher soil C with grazing reult of more rapid shoot turnover and resditribution of C within plant-soil system as a result of changes in species compostition

@article{fuhlendorf2001restoring}

restoring hetereogeneity on rangelands with evolutionary grazing patterns

spatial heterogeneity due to out of phase succession from various disturbances(fire, graze)

near water, high grazing, livestock select areas with less accumulation from previous years

overgraze results in decreased infiltration and increased runoff

rotational grazing encourages homogeneity

how to encourage heterogeneity/species diversity?

fire - intense grazing on burned patches allows unburned to regrow

no graze - homogeneous
heavy graze - reduces most biomass - defoliated - everything eaten

oklahoma bison experiment

 In fact, bison have maintained high re-
productive rates without nutritional supplementation (Robert
Hamilton [The Nature Conservancy], personal communi-
cation, 1999), in contrast to cattle, whose reproductive rates
in the absence of protein supplementation decline consider-
ably when dominant forage grasses mature under traditional
rangeland management (Hughes et al. 1978, McCollum and
Horn 1990). 

though minor differences in biodiversity when bison and cattle are grazed similarly

shifting mosaic - patch burning/herbicide/fertilization/focused grazing disturbances/shifting attractants


@misc{agouridis2005livestock}

Few studies examine impact of grazing impacts on stream water quality, habitat change vs BMPs

Owens et al. (1989) stated that increases in sedi-
ment transport from a continuously grazed site in
Ohio might justify the use of exclusion fencing along
fragile riparian areas. Although not directly
attributable to stream fencing, Brannan et al. (2000)
postulated that total suspended solid loads and flow
weighted concentration reductions in a Virginia
watershed were the result of exclusion fencing. In a
later study, Owens et al. (1996) examined the effects
of stream fencing on sediment losses in an Ohio
stream located in a heavily grazed watershed. The
researchers noted a 57 percent decrease in the annual
flow weighted averages for sediment concentration
and more than a 40 percent decrease in average
annual soil losses when cattle were fenced out of the
stream. Line et al. (2000) evaluated the effectiveness
of exclusion fencing combined with planting trees to
reduce pollutant loads to a small North Carolina
stream, and noted significant reductions in total sus-
pended solid (82.3 percent) and total solid (81.7 per-
cent) loads.

@article{liebig2010grazing}

examined global warming potential (co2, ch4, soil organic carbon) from from grazing in 2 native pastures (moderate, heavily) grazed and heavily grazed wheatgrass in ND. values for gwp and ghg intensity indicate net reductions in ghg with moderate stocking rates on native vegetation.

@article{pyke2002rangeland}

assessment system for rangeland health. 17 indicators to asess soil and site stability, hydrologic function, and biotic integrity. rills, water flow patterns, bare ground, gullies, wind scour litter, soil resistance to erosion, soil surface loss, plant density/composition, invasive plants etc

@article{powell1996nutrient}

productivities of range, crop, livestock are linked
graze range - fertilize crops
examine sustain nutrient cycling - examining impact on rangeland structure/composition, and nutrient balance
rangeland is equilibrium but cropland is in deficit
livestock must be managed to not deplete range but also supply cropland
requires alternative feeds from cropland
inihibited livestock mobility due to tnure policies inhibit farmer access to manure


nomadic->sedentary shift means more reliance on supplemental feed

encroahcment of croplands reduces rangeland

In the Sahel, livestock are the principal vectors of nutrient transfer
across the landscape. The cycling of biomass through livestock, and the
use of manure and urine to fertilize the soil, has long been an important
linkage between livestock and soil productivity in semi-arid Africa

rainfall variablility should prevent overgrazing

Although frequent grazing can reduce the dry matter (DM)
production of annual grasses by 50%, cumulative plant nitrogen (N) and
phosphorus (P) uptake in grazed areas is equal to, or is slightly greater
than nutrient uptake in ungrazed controls

Grazing, especially of annual grasses during the dry season, results in
DM losses due to trampling. This return of litter to soils enhances seed
germination and seedling establishment at the start of the following rainy
season (Renard et a/., 1993) and is important to cycling nutrients in these
rangeland systems

When grazing pressure remains high, especially on annual plants, flowering and the production
of seeds can be substantially reduced, threatening the propagation of the plant species over years

Many of the annual plants promoted by heavy grazing have low production potential
due to their small size and short growing cycle

This
study continues to show that the influence of grazing history on plant
communities is only conspicuous in situations of extreme livestock pres-
sure: in the vicinity of camps, watering points and other livestock resting
and concentration points. Elsewhere, the influence of grazing on the flor-
istic composition of these range sites is masked by the strong interaction
between seed germination, plant establishment and the distribution of the
early rains

Organizing the
seasonal mobility of livestock to avoid continuous grazing during
the growing season could overcome such a regressive trend. Exploiting the
feed quality gradient across the landscape (Westoby et al., 1989; Scoones,
1994) provides some flexibility for management at local scales while
preserving the ecosystem resilience.

vegetation removal and trampling can reduce infiltration and increase runoff
On a regional scale, even in situations of intense grazing pressure,
N exports from rangelands remain lower or equivalent to N inputs
(Diarra et al., 1995; de Leeuw et al., 1995). The amount of N removed
through grazing appears to be compensated by that returned through
trampling, plant roots and various natural sources

Given the lack of alternative dry season feeds, crop residues will continue
to provide vital livestock feeds in mixed farming systems of the Sahel.
Sustainable increases in livestock production, while protecting rangelands
against overgrazing will depend, therefore, on sustainable increases in
crop productivity. Continuous N removals without adequate replenish-
ment result in soil nutrient mining (Stoorvogel & Samling, 1990), and both
crop and livestock yields will eventually decline.
Of prime
interest to achieving sustainable increases in crop and livestock production
would be estimates of the amount of external nutrients (fertilizer and/or
livestock manure) required to offset internal nutrient deficits.

In Mali, for example, farmers who cultivate subsistence crops with com-
mercial rice and cotton appear to apply sufficient fertilizers to offset
internal nutrient deficits (Powell & Coulibaly, 1995). The same authors
estimated that farmers relying on rainfed crop production in semi-arid
areas could offset N harvests by applying two to four sacks of fertilizer
($28-70) per hectare of cropland, or applying more N in the form
of manure. Many of these farmers currently engage transhumant herders
to corral their animals on fields, so they may already be attaining N
balances on their croplands.


Fertilizer N sources need to be appropriate to specific soils, crops and rainfall conditions.
Fertilizers arc much more effective when applied in combination with organic fertilizer
sources (manures, compost, crop residues, etc.) and if proper management
is used to apply them. Before advocating an increase in herd size. more information
would be needed on current rangeland and cropland carrying capacities
and stocking rates, especially the ability of rangelands to
support more animals for manuring cropland.

Localized rainfall shortages
can easily be accommodated by moving animals to areas with better
rainfall. This opportunity becomes limited, however, when drought is widespread.
Apart from its negative effect on livestock numbers, drought may also
influence the type of livestock kept by farmers. Cattle, sheep and goats
have varying degrees of susceptibility to drought. During drought, small
ruminants, particularly goats, have a higher survival rate than cattle

Pastoralism will continue to provide not only food security and income to
herders and farmers alike, but also a vital supply of manure for maintaining
the productivity of cropland.

The capacity of rangelands to support livestock and nutrient harvesting
needs to be assessed at various rangeland:cropland
ratios,

Corralling livestock on cropland should be more widely
encouraged where soils are sandy and the risk of soil compaction due to
animal trampling is minimal.

The manure of transhumant herds remains vital to sustaining cropland productivity
in many rangeland/cropland farming systems. Access to manure and, therefore,
transhumance  needs to be encouraged in these production
systems. Factors that inhibit livestock movement, and there-
fore, farmers’ access to the manure of transhumant herds, will greatly
increase the need for other external nutrient inputs such as fertilizers to
prevent declines in soil fertility and crop yields

Natural fluxes in pasture productivity and livestock
numbers due to erratic rainfall and drought should not be disrupted.
Policies that advocate the purposeful supplemental feeding of animals during drought.
or rapid restocking during post-drought years could easily offset these
natural balances, degrade rangelands, and undermine the sustainability
of these production systems.

@article{mabbutt1987implementation}

United Nations Conference on Desertification

The Plan of Action to Combat Desertification
(PACD) formulated by UNCOD and subsequently endorsed by the UN General Assembly3 attempted
to address the dimensions, complexity and urgency of what was recognized as a global problem
through cooperative national, regional and international actions. Three related and progressively
encompassing objectives are identd in its recommendations: to arrest and reverse the environmental
processes of desertification; to establish ecologically appropriate, productive and sustainable
land uses; and to secure the social and economic advancement of the communities affected. 
largely ineffective - some success in dune stabilizaation and reafforestation
little success in combatting desertification of rangelands

@article{graef2001spatial}

The variability in rainfall in semi-arid Niger is great both spatially and tem-
porally and is considered to be one of the most limiting factors in agriculture.
To investigate these constraints more quantitatively, climate data at both
survey and detailed scale were analysed. The results show that rainfall can vary
considerably even within a few kilometres distance and on different time
scales which means that crop yields are very unpredictable. Socio-economic
surveys at two villages showed that smallholders have adapted a range of
management strategies to ensure at least a minimum yield. Despite this, soil
fertility is declining and further technologies need to be integrated into farming
systems to make them sustainable.

Increasing land shortage has forced the farmers to shorten their fallow
periods from the traditional average of about 15 years to 2–5 years at present (Wezel,
1998) which leads to a higher land use intensity. This aggravates the problem of nutrient
mining and decreases soil productivity. Because manure is limited and the farmers’
economic situation enables the application of only small quantities of fertilizer the
farmers are not able to balance the nutrient deficits, creating a negative trend in future
soil fertility. There is some evidence that the most limiting factors on the sandy soils of
semi-arid Niger are the levels of phosphorus and nitrogen rather than water supply
(Payne et al., 1991), but other studies on heavy-textured (e.g. Lowenberg-DeBoer et al.,
1994) or superficially crusted soils (e.g. Valentin & Casenave, 1992) with low infiltration
rates emphasised the increasing importance of water management in drought-prone
areas.

@article{knox2012remote}

remote sensing of forage quality 

In this study findings from
ecological and laboratory studies, focused on assessing forage quality, are combined to evaluate the
feasibility of a remote sensing approach for predicting the spatial and temporal variations in forage qual-
ity. Spatially available ecological findings (ancillary data), and physically linked spectral data (absorption
data) are evaluated in this study and combined to create models which predict forage quality (nitrogen,
phosphorus and fibre concentrations) of grasses collected in the Kruger National Park, South Africa, and
analysed in both dry and wet seasons

combination of ancillary data and absorption in certain bands - primarily infrared
best results from combination. most pedictive variables depends on dry/wet season

@article{pickup1996estimating}

Estimating the effects of land degradation and rainfall
variation on productivity in rangelands: an approach
using remote sensing and models of grazing and herbage
dynamics

Land degradation in non-equilibrium rangelands may be defined in terms of loss
of resilience and is linked with lower economic productivity through reduction in
forage consumption by stock.
2. Loss of resilience may be represented by lower water use efficiency and increased
tree and shrub cover, in a simple herbage production and consumption model. The
model may be calibrated from remotely sensed data.
3. Model calibration for rangeland areas in central Australia yields parameter values
for degraded and undegraded situations, allowing estimation of productivity.
4. Modelling of a 50-year rainfall sequence shows that herbage production and con-
sumption by cattle change through time because of rainfall variability. They also
change with paddock layout and access to water.
5. The effect of degradation on herbage consumption is relatively small compared
with the effects of rainfall variability, but it increases the chance of running out of
forage during drought.

@article{dardel2014re}

Re-greening Sahel: 30 years of remote sensing data and field
observations (Mali, Niger)

GIMMS-3g NDVI linear regression explains 58% in Gourma, 38% in Fakara

increase of erosion and runoff due to increasing vegetation in sandy regions
re-greening in Gourma pastoral region
local degradation but overall regreening

@article{breman1983rangeland}

failure to appreciate effects of low soil fertility and low rainfall --> overstimate capacity of modern, sedentary ag and underestimate seminomadic

traditional view incorrect - not overgrazing, too  large herds, or keeping animals past useful age

semiarid transition zone

short 2-4 mo rainy season
100mm N 600mm S
thorn shrub steppes - growing season 2-2.5 mo S <1mo N
rare pereniial grasses may be longer
dominant sany eolian soils absorb moisture
soils on sandstone, laterite (anciant riverbeds) loam/silt bad runoff
borders and floodplains Lake Chad, rivers Senegal Niger Chari dominated by grasses indispensible for pastoralists

growth limited to natural inputs 10000kg/ha - limited in 1st part by P; second part N

The average annual bal-
ance showed that the vegetation did not
transpire more than 10 to 20 percent of
the rainwater under natural conditions in
the southern border of the Sahel. About
60 percent evaporates and 25 percent
disappears as runoff. Evaporation is rela-
tively high because a fairly large part of
the rain falls before and after the growing
period of the vegetation.

when water limited - protein content 18% at beginning, 12% end - North
when N limited - 3-6% - South

livestock needs 7% - higher for growth/milk

selective grazing - more quality in N when water limited

Nomadism/vs semi-nomadism/vs sedentary
N best for livestock, water limited limits capacity though (drinking water)
S more water, can support more, but less protein 

transhumance - twice a year the herdsman migrate N during rain, then south - settlements in N savannah and river basins
similar to natural grazing patterns of zebu

Both the herds of the seminomads and
those of the farmers are of essential
importance as a source of manure for
traditional arable farming. The use of
fertilizers is unprofitable, at least in cereal growing.

lack of fallow in arable lands

need animal droppings to compensate

The mean herd size for an ac-
ceptable subsistence minimum must be
four to five tropical livestock units per
member of the family. Before the
drought in the early 1970's the overall
value available in the Sahel was 4.5
tropical livestock units per person and
just after, 2.8 units. Total herd size has
returned to the 1970 level, but livestock
density is still only 3.5 tropical livestock
units per person because of the popula-
tion increase of 2.5 percent per year.
The suggestion that a smaller herd will
produce more in an absolute sense is not
true for rangelands such as the Sahel that
are dominated by annual plant species,
whose production is mainly determined
by the availability of nitrogen.

traditional grazing systems oriented towards perennial grasses wont work!!!

Options:
alterative livlihoods for pastoralists
or 
add nutrents - cowpeas, groundnuts, manure - first step to stop depletion

seminomads supply young animals fattened in south? only if nutrients are increased.

@article{carlson1996comprehensive}

Comprehensive evaluation of the improved SPUR model

SPUR (Simulation of Production and Utilization of Rangelands) is a physically-based model designed to simulate
the complexity of rangeland ecosystems (Wight and Skiles, 1987). Results of extensive validation testing in Texas
indicated a need to modify the model to improve submodel integration and procedural guidelines. A description of
the modified model (SPUR-91) is provided. A sensitivity analysis was conducted, examining the influence of changes
in model output corresponding to perturbations made to individual input parameters. The model was then
extensively validated using a Texas data set composed of simultaneous measurements of hydrology, plant, livestock,
and meteorological parameters.

hydrology, animal, vegetation, economics

@article{traore2012regional}

An accurate and simple Reference Evapotranspiration (ETo) numerical model eases
to use for supporting irrigation planning and its effective management is highly desired in
Sahelian regions. This paper investigates the performance ability of the Gene-expression
Programming (GEP) for modeling ETo using decadal climatic data from a Sahelian country;
Burkina Faso. For the study; important data are collected from six synoptic meteorological
stations located in different regions; Gaoua, Pô, Boromo, Ouahigouya, Bogandé and Dori. The
climatic data combinations are used as inputs to develop the GEP models at regional-specific
data basis for estimating ETo. GEP performances are evaluated with the root mean square error
(RMSE), and coefficient of correlation (R) between estimated and targeted Penman-Monteith
FAO56 set as the true reference values. Obviously; from the statistical viewpoint; GEP
computing technique has showed a good ability for providing numerical models on a regional
data basis. The performances of GEP based on temperatures data are quite good able to
substitute empirical equations at regional level to some extent. It is found that the models with
wind velocity yield high accuracies by causing radical improve of the performances with R 2
(0.925-0.961) and RMSE (0.131-0.272 mmday -1 ); while relative humidity may cause only
(R 2 00.801-0.933 and RMSE00.370-0.578 mmday -1 ). Statistically; GEP is an effectual mod-
eling tool for computing successfully evapotranspiration in Sahel.

@article{rango2009unmanned}

Rangeland comprises as much as 70% of the Earth’s land surface area. Much
of this vast space is in very remote areas that are expensive and often impossible to access
on the ground. Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) have great potential for rangeland
management. UAVs have several advantages over satellites and piloted aircraft: they can
be deployed quickly and repeatedly; they are less costly and safer than piloted aircraft;
they are flexible in terms of flying height and timing of missions; and they can obtain
imagery at sub-decimeter resolution. This hyperspatial imagery allows for quantification
of plant cover, composition, and structure at multiple spatial scales. Our experiments
have shown that this capability, from an off-the-shelf mini-UAV, is directly applicable to
operational agency needs for measuring and monitoring. For use by operational agencies
to carry out their mandated responsibilities, various requirements must be met: an
affordable and reliable platform; a capability for autonomous, low altitude flights; takeoff
and landing in small areas surrounded by rugged terrain; and an easily applied data
analysis methodology. A number of image processing and orthorectification challenges
have been or are currently being addressed, but the potential to depict the land surface
commensurate with field data perspectives across broader spatial extents is unrivaled.

When compared to conventional aerial photos with 25 cm resolution, which cannot
display information required for rangeland health applications, UAV aerial photos, flown
at 215 m altitude, produce 5-6 cm resolution images. These images can provide much of
the information necessary for rangeland health assessments and monitoring (21, 22)
including vegetation and bare soil cover, composition by functional or structural group,
spatial distribution of plants and intercanopy gaps, and vegetation type in some plant
communities (13) although, even at this resolution (6 cm), it is sometimes difficult to
distinguish litter from bare soil.

Quickbird 60cm satellite is best for RS

The only other aerial data source comparable to the 5-6 cm resolution available from
UAVs involves low flying piloted aircraft that can obtain sub – 5cm digital images in 4-
bands for relatively small areas. The latest digital aerial cameras such as the UltraCamX
or Xp manufactured by Microsoft Vexel Imaging GmbH TM can now acquire imagery at
2.9 cm from 500 m and 1.8 cm from 300 m. At the 2.9 cm resolution, they can now
acquire overlapping imagery for orthophoto production. The two drawbacks of such
image acquisition are operational expense and safety for the pilots.

MLB bat 3 - $50000 "light/mini"

@article{rango2006using}

Unmanned Aerial Vehicles for use in rangeland applica-
tions have modest requirements, which should reduce their
cost relative to UAVs used for applications requiring high-
cost airframes, heavy payload capability, and the ability to
stay aloft for several days to weeks ~e.g., for forest fire
management, pollution and air quality assessment, coastal
ocean observations, cloud and precipitation assessment,
and severe storm monitoring applications!. We believe that
most imaging requirements can adequately be served from
relatively low altitudes and slow airspeeds, for which the
moderately expensive UAVs are designed ~e.g., the MLB-
Bat 3!. These kinds of flights result in high resolution
images required for distinguishing rangeland plant species,
as well as possessing the capability for measuring patch
and gap sizes and describing spatial patterns at multiple
spatial scales across a variety of ecosystems.

quickbird can't distinguish intercanopy gaps

used Yamaha Rmax helicopter and modified model airplane in new mexico rangeland
estimated canopy coverage

used image processing to classify rangeland species - bare soil, mesquite, brrom snakeweed and grass

good pics in this article

@article{andrew2003sustainable}

The SGS (Sustainable Grazing Systems) Program was an
integrated research and extension program that operated
across the southern high rainfall zone (HRZ, >600mm/year)
of Australia. It comprised a national experiment, a training
program, and a regional producer network

As judged by peer and independent review, the processes
implemented in the SGS National Experiment were a
collective success and provided the type of organisational
structure that Cullen (2002) described as being essential for
solving environmental problems by delivering good science
and practical application at the landscape, rather than plot,
scale

@article{wark2007transforming}

Transforming Agriculture through Pervasive Wireless Sensor Networks
australia

managing in large, remote areas difficult and dangerous

pasture assessment

cattle GPS, rangeland images, soil moisture
not all cattle have gps - nearest neighbor
behavior classification by movement tracking 

nordic radio

solar power

